Let's add some metrics to
our expense microservice,
starting with the lab monitor-metrics start script,
which download the exercise files and
starts the database for
the expense application,
but also starts the Prometheus
and a Grafana server
which we will use later.
It will take a little bit
so while you are waiting for it to start,
just switch to another terminal window and
go to DO378/labs/monitor-metrics/ directory.
Listing the contents of that directory,
you can see a number of files.
Now prometheus.yml is the file that
configures the Prometheus server.
You can see it's configured to scrape
the metrics every 3 seconds
from /q/metrics endpoint
at localhost port 8080.
So this is where we are going to
be starting our application.
The datasource for
Grafana is then or the
Prometheus server is then
available on localhost port 9090.
Now going back to the original window,
the services have by now already started.
So we can go to our
expense-service/ directory and
add the micrometer-registry
prometheus extension.
So we can see it was added
successfully to pom.xml.
And then have a look at
the expenses resource,
ExpenseResource and just
start adding metrics.
So the first thing we are
going to need to do is
inject a MeterRegistry into the class,
and here it is being injected.
We are also going to create a
Counter and a timer supplier.
So we are going to be basically counting
the number of lists invocations
and timing the amount of time that the
lists expenses method takes to complete.
What we are also going
to do is we are going to
measure the amount of time
it took from the last time
somebody invoked the expense list.
Just as a point of interest,
we can use a StopWatch to do this for us.
StopWatch is a utility class from org.
apache.commons, that just keeps
measuring time from the last reset.
And it's actually quite a
useful implementation to do
such things as we wanted here, right!
We will initialize the
counter and the timer.
And of course, we will also
use this StopWatch in a gauge.
It's perfect for gauge because it really
does count the time from last invocation.
And then when someone invokes
the list method again,
it resets to 0, so it's
not really a counter,
it will both rise and fall.
So we will initialize all of these 3 in
a PostConstruct lifecycle
method called initMeters.
As you can see here, we
asked the meter registry
to give us a counter called
callsToExpenseList.
We ask it to give us a timer
called expenseListTimer.
And of course, because this
is a timer for a method,
we need to wrap that method
in a supplier functional interface.
And what the list method actually
does is, it invokes the
expenseService list method.
And that's what we will be wrapping here.
And then we will be replacing the
actual invocation further down
in the list method with
this, timer's get invocation.
The timer's get invocation in turn,
will invoke the expenseService's
list method and return the result,
as we can see here,
by the generic type specified.
We also initialize registry to give us
a gauge called timeToLastExpenseList.
Here you can see
an interesting detail.
You do not have to store the instance
of a metric because the registry
actually saves or remembers that a
metric has been initialized.
And if you want to access this gauge,
all you need to know is the exact
name you gave it and you can
access it directly
through the registry and
perform any sort of
operations you want to.
Now, what we are going to do with
this gauge is we are going
to give it a description
and then we are going to
tell it that the value of
the gauge is actually the instance
variable called stopWatch,
which we have initialized here.
And the
actual method to obtain the current value
of the gauge is StopWatch's
getTime method.
Right!
So let's modify the list method
to include our counters.
First thing we are going to
do is we are going to replace
the expenseService.list method invocation
with the invocation of the
listTimer.get method.
As we said, because this GET
method is wrapping a Supplier that
returns a list of expenses and points
to the expense services list
method via lambda reference,
the invocation of this timer's get method
actually invokes what we want to.
This is the expenseService.list method,
but also times it, encapsulate it in
a timer and remembers how much
time it took to complete.
But before we return this,
we have to first of all,
increment the number of
invocations to expense list.
And because we want to measure the
time since the last list invocation,
you want to reset and
start the stopwatch again.
Also, what we are going
to do is we are going to
add a counter and a timer
also to the creation method.
Here we use the direct
approach so we simply ask
the registry to create a counter
if it hasn't been created yet,
callsToExpenseCreate
and then increment it.
So if it's already being created,
it will just be incremented.
If this is the first time
we are invoking the method,
it will be created and
incremented at the same time.
What we will also do is we will replace
the return statement, where
the expenseService.create
method has been invoked.
We will replace it with the
timer's get invocation.
But again, we are going
to use a lambda here.
We are going to wrap the Supplier
with the type of Expense
in a reference to expenseService.create(expense) method.
So this does basically the same
as the old return statement did,
except it wraps the invocation of the
method in yet an additional timer.
We are done with the code modifications.
Now, let's start the Quarkus instance.
It's going to download
a number of extensions that
belong to JAR files
that belong to the quarkus.
micrometer prometheus registry extension.
And here it is starting up, there we go.
So I can switch to another terminal window
and invoke the get expenses method.
We can see if we ask for the metrics,
then we can see that, for example,
the expenseListTimer
has been initialized.
It took 83 milliseconds,
almost 84 milliseconds to
return the above result.
It's been invoked only once
and there's an
average of all the
invocation, it's actually a total
of all the invocation times.
But this is not the counter
that we have registered, right?
This is the timer.
Note that the timer also has a counter,
but our explicit counter is a little
bit further down, there is,
it's callsToExpenseList_total.
There we go.
And there is also timeToLastExpenseList,
which at this moment in time
is 10, almost 11 seconds.
Note that the other metrics which we
haven't yet used do not appear here.
They will only appear when we
create an expense for the
first time, for example.
But we do have a number of system metrics
such as cpu_usage of the process,
the http_server_connections_seconds,
and so on and so on.
Let's go to Grafana.
Grafana is running on port 3000
and you can login using your
username of admin, the password of admin
and then your Grafana will prompt
you to change the admin password,
just click skip, and you will
get to the starting page.
You can open the Dashboards
section by going to
dashboards menu and clicking
Home or just simply
entering /dashboards in the URL here.
And then you will see
the expenses folder
which contains the Demo
Expenses Dashboard.
So clicking on that Demo
Expenses Dashboard will show
you 4 different diagrams.
So the expense lists total requests,
the number of calls to
expense is create, time to
response and time from last
call to list expenses.
Now, while we are monitoring these metrics,
we can also start a script
called /generate data,
which will generate some additional data
and you can see how nicely
it increases in the graphs.
How the time to response actually
reflects the current response times.
And as you can also see,
there's been, what was that 170 ish or
so 160 seconds since the last time
to call the list of expenses method,
and then it drops and stays at 0.
Because what the script we have
just started does is, it
continuously lists and
create some expenses, right!
So there we have it.
Really easy ways of adding
metrics to our application.
You can now just press Control C to stop the
generate data script and move over to
the Quarkus window and stop that one as
well by pressing Control C. And then
simply run lab monitor-metrics
finish script, which will
clean everything up and stop
the database and Grafana
and the Prometheus servers.
And then join us in the next video,
where we are going to have
a look at how to trace
requests among various
numbers of microservices.